###########
 Streaming
###########

*****
 Why
*****

The Nuitka development has become richer by me developing online once in
a while. This obvious has a lot of constraints to address, but it will
happen on a regular basis.

*****
 How
*****

On Discord, we have a Streaming room. There is a "react" bot, that you
can use to be automatically notified by Discord, when a Stream is
started, this one is in: https://discord.gg/nZ9hr9tUck the welcome
channel of the Discord.

The main chat on Gitter will be linked a chat room on Discord, so for
people not on Discord, they still have that available.

The stream will be recorded in Youtube and later put online, I do not
have the resources, to maybe put out only a few excerpts, not sure how
good it's going to be. There will be quality issues in the beginning.
And I don't want to spend a lot of time editing material that might not
get watched all that much.

Discord could be used for a call-in part. I could un-mute people and
discuss one on one with viewers, live on air, answering questions.

So expect to see me streaming to Youtube on my existing channel that I
cleaned up a bit: https://www.youtube.com/c/KayHayen

******
 When
******

I believe normally the weekend should be used. The times will have to
depend much on my family situation. I will announce start dates some
days ahead of time on Twitter and to the Streams react bot.

I usually plan to stream with one lunch/sports break, on my CEST morning
and an another one in the afternoon or evening time, if I can spell a
full day. This is essentially a work day on Nuitka for me.

******
 What
******

My idea is to take on challenging topics, e.g. making code
specialization of ``INT`` ``LONG`` and ``CLONG`` work for code like
``some_int += 2``, where the ``2`` is currently used as a prepared
``INT`` or ``LONG`` object (depending on Python version).

In streams so far, it worked really well to commonly improve the web
site, add specific optimization, etc. Doing a report of current project
status and generally clarification would be good, but I think there also
needs to be some plan, like making a certain piece of code quicker. I
will be asking for submissions on Twitter and/or in a blog post, or just
do what's on my mind, that should be done, but hasn't been done in a
while and that's sort of interesting.

***************
 Announcements
***************

I think I could e.g. go with streaming on Sunday and announcing the
topic on Friday in a blog post, and/or a Twitter post. Then when going
live, a Discord ping is done, and maybe a few hours before. Gitter chat
will also get a text message. Youtube has the bell, that I might ask
people to use, but I don't like asking these things.
